---
title: "The Old Image in a New Form: Guild Socialism"
---

Whenever the quarrels of self-centered groups become unbearable,
reformers in the past found themselves forced to choose between two
great alternatives. They could take the path to Rome and impose a
Roman peace upon the warring tribes. They could take the path to
isolation, to autonomy and self-sufficiency. Almost always they chose
that path which they had least recently travelled. If they had tried
out the deadening monotony of empire, they cherished above all other
things the simple freedom of their own community. But if they had seen
this simple freedom squandered in parochial jealousies they longed for
the spacious order of a great and powerful state.

Whichever choice they made, the essential difficulty was the same. If
decisions were decentralized they soon floundered in a chaos of local
opinions. If they were centralized, the policy of the state was based
on the opinions of a small social set at the capital. In any case
force was necessary to defend one local right against another, or to
impose law and order on the localities, or to resist class government
at the center, or to defend the whole society, centralized or
decentralized, against the outer barbarian.

Modern democracy and the industrial system were both born in a time of
reaction against kings, crown government, and a regime of detailed
economic regulation. In the industrial sphere this reaction took the
form of extreme devolution, known as laissez-faire individualism. Each
economic decision was to be made by the man who had title to the
property involved. Since almost everything was owned by somebody,
there would be somebody to manage everything. This was plural
sovereignty with a vengeance.

It was economic government by anybody's economic philosophy, though it
was supposed to be controlled by immutable laws of political economy
that must in the end produce harmony. It produced many splendid
things, but enough sordid and terrible ones to start counter-currents.
One of these was the trust, which established a kind of Roman peace
within industry, and a Roman predatory imperialism outside. People
turned to the legislature for relief. They invoked representative
government, founded on the image of the township farmer, to regulate
the semi-sovereign corporations. The working class turned to labor
organization. There followed a period of increasing centralization and
a sort of race of armaments. The trusts interlocked, the craft unions
federated and combined into a labor movement, the political system
grew stronger at Washington and weaker in the states, as the reformers
tried to match its strength against big business.

In this period practically all the schools of socialist thought from
the Marxian left to the New Nationalists around Theodore Roosevelt,
looked upon centralization as the first stage of an evolution which
would end in the absorption of all the semi-sovereign powers of
business by the political state. The evolution never took place,
except for a few months during the war. That was enough, and there was
a turn of the wheel against the omnivorous state in favor of several
new forms of pluralism. But this time society was to swing back not to
the atomic individualism of Adam Smith's economic man and Thomas
Jefferson's farmer, but to a sort of molecular individualism of
voluntary groups.

One of the interesting things about all these oscillations of theory
is that each in turn promises a world in which no one will have to
follow Machiavelli in order to survive. They are all established by
some form of coercion, they all exercise coercion in order to maintain
themselves, and they are all discarded as a result of coercion. Yet
they do not accept coercion, either physical power or special
position, patronage, or privilege, as part of their ideal. The
individualist said that self-enlightened self-interest would bring
internal and external peace. The socialist is sure that the motives to
aggression will disappear. The new pluralist hopes they
will.^[See G. D. H. Cole, _Social Theory,_ p. 142.]
Coercion is the surd in almost all social theory, except the
Machiavellian. The temptation to ignore it, because it is absurd,
inexpressible, and unmanageable, becomes overwhelming in any man who
is trying to rationalize human life.

## 2

The lengths to which a clever man will sometimes go in order to escape
a full recognition of the role of force is shown by Mr. G. D. H.
Cole's book on Guild Socialism. The present state, he says, "is
primarily an instrument of coercion;"^[Cole, _Guild
Socialism_, p. 107.] in a guild socialist society there will be no
sovereign power, though there will be a coordinating body. He calls
this body the Commune.

He then begins to enumerate the powers of the Commune, which, we
recall, is to be primarily not an instrument of coercion.^[
_Op. cit._ Ch. VIII.] It settles price disputes. Sometimes it
fixes prices, allocates the surplus or distributes the loss. It
allocates natural resources, and controls the issue of credit. It also
"allocates communal labor-power." It ratifies the budgets of the
guilds and the civil services. It levies taxes. "All questions of
income" fall within its jurisdiction. It "allocates" income to the
non-productive members of the community. It is the final arbiter in
all questions of policy and jurisdiction between the guilds. It passes
constitutional laws fixing the functions of the functional bodies. It
appoints the judges. It confers coercive powers upon the guilds, and
ratifies their by-laws wherever these involve coercion. It declares
war and makes peace. It controls the armed forces. It is the supreme
representative of the nation abroad. It settles boundary questions
within the national state. It calls into existence new functional
bodies, or distributes new functions to old ones. It runs the police.
It makes whatever laws are necessary to regulate personal conduct and
personal property.

These powers are exercised not by one commune, but by a federal
structure of local and provincial communes with a National commune at
the top. Mr. Cole is, of course, welcome to insist that this is not a
sovereign state, but if there is a coercive power now enjoyed by any
modern government for which he has forgotten to make room, I cannot
think of it.

He tells us, however, that Guild society will be non-coercive: "we
want to build a new society which will be conceived in the spirit, not
of coercion, but of free service."^[_Op. cit._, p.
141.] Everyone who shares that hope, as most men and women do, will
therefore look closely to see what there is in the Guild Socialist
plan which promises to reduce coercion to its lowest limits, even
though the Guildsmen of to-day have already reserved for their
communes the widest kind of coercive power. It is acknowledged at once
that the new society cannot be brought into existence by universal
consent. Mr. Cole is too honest to shirk the element of force required
to make the transition.^[_Cf. op. cit._, Ch. X. ] And
while obviously he cannot predict how much civil war there might be,
he is quite clear that there would have to be a period of direct
action by the trade unions.

## 3

But leaving aside the problems of transition, and any consideration of
what the effect is on their future action, when men have hacked their
way through to the promised land, let us imagine the Guild Society in
being. What keeps it running as a non-coercive society?

Mr. Cole has two answers to this question. One is the orthodox Marxian
answer that the abolition of capitalist property will remove the
motive to aggression. Yet he does not really believe that, because if
he did, he would care as little as does the average Marxian how the
working class is to run the government, once it is in control. If his
diagnosis were correct, the Marxian would be quite right: if the
disease were the capitalist class and only the capitalist class,
salvation would automatically follow its extinction. But Mr. Cole is
enormously concerned about whether the society which follows the
revolution is to be run by state collectivism, by guilds or
cooperative societies, by a democratic parliament or by functional
representation. In fact, it is as a new theory of representative
government that guild socialism challenges attention.

The guildsmen do not expect a miracle to result from the disappearance
of capitalist property rights. They do expect, and of course quite
rightly, that if equality of income were the rule, social relations
would be profoundly altered. But they differ, as far as I can make
out, from the orthodox Russian communist in this respect: The
communist proposes to establish equality by force of the dictatorship
of the proletariat, believing that if once people were equalized both
in income and in service, they would then lose the incentives to
aggression. The guildsmen also propose to establish equality by force,
but are shrewd enough to see that if an equilibrium is to be
maintained they have to provide institutions for maintaining it.
Guildsmen, therefore, put their faith in what they believe to be a new
theory of democracy.

Their object, says Mr. Cole, is "to get the mechanism right, and to
adjust it as far as possible to the expression of men's social wills."
[Reference: _Op. cit._, p. 16.] These wills need to be given
opportunity for self-expression in self-government "in any and every
form of social action." Behind these words is the true democratic
impulse, the desire to enhance human dignity, as well as the
traditional assumption that this human dignity is impugned, unless
each person's will enters into the management of everything that
affects him. The guildsman, like the earlier democrat therefore, looks
about him for an environment in which this ideal of self-government
can be realized. A hundred years and more have passed since Rousseau
and Jefferson, and the center of interest has shifted from the country
to the city. The new democrat can no longer turn to the idealized
rural township for the image of democracy. He turns now to the
workshop. "The spirit of association must be given free play in the
sphere in which it is best able to find expression. This is manifestly
the factory, in which men have the habit and tradition of working
together. The factory is the natural and fundamental unit of
industrial democracy. This involves, not only that the factory must be
free, as far as possible, to manage its own affairs, but also that the
democratic unit of the factory must be made the basis of the larger
democracy of the Guild, and that the larger organs of Guild
administration and government must be based largely on the principle
of factory representation."^[_Op. cit._, p. 40.]

Factory is, of course, a very loose word, and Mr. Cole asks us to take
it as meaning mines, shipyards, docks, stations, and every place which
is "a natural center of production."^[_Op. cit._, p.
41] But a factory in this sense is quite a different thing from an
industry. The factory, as Mr. Cole conceives it, is a work place where
men are really in personal contact, an environment small enough to be
known directly to all the workers. "This democracy if it is to be
real, must come home to, and be exercisable directly by, every
individual member of the Guild."^[_Op. cit._, p. 40.]
This is important, because Mr. Cole, like Jefferson, is seeking a
natural unit of government. The only natural unit is a perfectly
familiar environment. Now a large plant, a railway system, a great
coal field, is not a natural unit in this sense. Unless it is a very
small factory indeed, what Mr. Cole is really thinking about is the
shop. That is where men can be supposed to have "the habit and
tradition of working together." The rest of the plant, the rest of the
industry, is an inferred environment.

## 4

Anybody can see, and almost everybody will admit, that self-government
in the purely internal affairs of the shop is government of affairs
that "can be taken in at a single view."^[Aristotle,
_Politics_, Bk. VII, Ch. IV.] But dispute would arise as to what
constitute the internal affairs of a shop. Obviously the biggest
interests, like wages, standards of production, the purchase of
supplies, the marketing of the product, the larger planning of work,
are by no means purely internal. The shop democracy has freedom,
subject to enormous limiting conditions from the outside. It can deal
to a certain extent with the arrangement of work laid out for the
shop, it can deal with the temper and temperament of individuals, it
can administer petty industrial justice, and act as a court of first
instance in somewhat larger individual disputes. Above all it can act
as a unit in dealing with other shops, and perhaps with the plant as a
whole. But isolation is impossible. The unit of industrial democracy
is thoroughly entangled in foreign affairs. And it is the management
of these external relations that constitutes the test of the guild
socialist theory.

They have to be managed by representative government arranged in a
federal order from the shop to the plant, the plant to the industry,
the industry to the nation, with intervening regional grouping of
representatives. But all this structure derives from the shop, and all
its peculiar virtues are ascribed to this source. The representatives
who choose the representatives who choose the representatives who
finally "coordinate" and "regulate" the shops are elected, Mr. Cole
asserts, by a true democracy. Because they come originally from a
self-governing unit, the whole federal organism will be inspired by
the spirit and the reality of self-government. Representatives will
aim to carry out the workers' "actual will as understood by themselves,"^[_Op. cit._, p. 42.] that is, as understood by the
individual in the shops.

A government run literally on this principle would, if history is any
guide, be either a perpetual logroll, or a chaos of warring shops. For
while the worker in the shop can have a real opinion about matters
entirely within the shop, his "will" about the relation of that shop
to the plant, the industry, and the nation is subject to all the
limitations of access, stereotype, and self-interest that surround any
other self-centered opinion. His experience in the shop at best brings
only aspects of the whole to his attention. His opinion of what is
right within the shop he can reach by direct knowledge of the
essential facts. His opinion of what is right in the great complicated
environment out of sight is more likely to be wrong than right if it
is a generalization from the experience of the individual shop. As a
matter of experience, the representatives of a guild society would
find, just as the higher trade union officials find today, that on a
great number of questions which they have to decide there is no
"actual will as understood" by the shops.

## 5

The guildsmen insist, however, that such criticism is blind because it
ignores a great political discovery. You may be quite right, they
would say, in thinking that the representatives of the shops would
have to make up their own minds on many questions about which the
shops have no opinion. But you are simply entangled in an ancient
fallacy: you are looking for somebody to represent a group of people.
He cannot be found. The only representative possible is one who acts
for "some particular function,"^[_Op. cit._, pp. 23-24.]
and therefore each person must help choose as many representatives "as
there are distinct essential groups of functions to be performed."

Assume then that the representatives speak, not for the men in the
shops, but for certain functions in which the men are interested. They
are, mind you, disloyal if they do not carry out the will of the group
about the function, as understood by the group.^[_Cf._
Part V, "The Making of a Common Will."] These functional
representatives meet. Their business is to coordinate and regulate. By
what standard does each judge the proposals of the other, assuming, as
we must, that there is conflict of opinion between the shops, since if
there were not, there would be no need to coordinate and regulate?

Now the peculiar virtue of functional democracy is supposed to be that
men vote candidly according to their own interests, which it is
assumed they know by daily experience. They can do that within the
self-contained group. But in its external relations the group as a
whole, or its representative, is dealing with matters that transcend
immediate experience. The shop does not arrive spontaneously at a view
of the whole situation. Therefore, the public opinions of a shop about
its rights and duties in the industry and in society, are matters of
education or propaganda, not the automatic product of shop-consciousness.
Whether the guildsmen elect a delegate, or a representative, they do
not escape the problem of the orthodox democrat. Either the group
as a whole, or the elected spokesman, must stretch his mind beyond
the limits of direct experience. He must vote on questions coming up
from other shops, and on matters coming from beyond the frontiers of
the whole industry. The primary interest of the shop does not even
cover the function of a whole industrial vocation. The function of a
vocation, a great industry, a district, a nation is a concept, not an
experience, and has to be imagined, invented, taught and believed.
And even though you define function as carefully as possible, once
you admit that the view of each shop on that function will not
necessarily coincide with the view of other shops, you are saying
that the representative of one interest is concerned in the proposals
made by other interests. You are saying that he must conceive a
common interest. And in voting for him you are choosing a man who
will not simply represent your view of your function, which is all that
you know at first hand, but a man who will represent your views
about other people's views of that function. You are voting as
indefinitely as the orthodox democrat.

## 6

The guildsmen in their own minds have solved the question of how to
conceive a common interest by playing with the word function. They
imagine a society in which all the main work of the world has been
analysed into functions, and these functions in turn synthesized
harmoniously.^[_Cf. op. cit._, Ch. XIX.] They suppose
essential agreement about the purposes of society as a whole, and
essential agreement about the role of every organized group in
carrying out those purposes. It was a nice sentiment, therefore, which
led them to take the name of their theory from an institution that
arose in a Catholic feudal society. But they should remember that the
scheme of function which the wise men of that age assumed was not
worked out by mortal man. It is unclear how the guildsmen think the
scheme is going to be worked out and made acceptable in the modern
world. Sometimes they seem to argue that the scheme will develop from
trade union organization, at other times that the communes will define
the constitutional function of the groups. But it makes a considerable
practical difference whether they believe that the groups define their
own functions or not.

In either case, Mr. Cole assumes that society can be carried on by a
social contract based on an accepted idea of "distinct essential
groups of functions." How does one recognize these distinct essential
groups? So far as I can make out, Mr. Cole thinks that a function is
what a group of people are interested in. "The essence of functional
democracy is that a man should count as many times over as there are
functions in which he is interested."^[_Social Theory,_
p. 102 _et seq._] Now there are at least two meanings to the word
interested. You can use it to mean that a man is involved, or that his
mind is occupied. John Smith, for example, may have been tremendously
interested in the Stillman divorce case. He may have read every word
of the news in every lobster edition. On the other hand, young Guy
Stillman, whose legitimacy was at stake, probably did not trouble
himself at all. John Smith was interested in a suit that did not
affect his "interests," and Guy was uninterested in one that would
determine the whole course of his life. Mr. Cole, I am afraid, leans
towards John Smith. He is answering the "very foolish objection" that
to vote by functions is to be voting very often: "If a man is not
interested enough to vote, and cannot be aroused to interest enough to
make him vote, on, say, a dozen distinct subjects, he waives his right
to vote and the result is no less democratic than if he voted blindly
and without interest."

Mr. Cole thinks that the uninstructed voter "waives his right to
vote." From this it follows that the votes of the instructed reveal
their interest, and their interest defines the function.^[_Cf._ Ch. XVIII of this book. "Since everybody was assumed to be
interested enough in important affairs, only those affairs came to
seem important in which everybody was interested."] "Brown, Jones, and
Robinson must therefore have, not one vote each, but as many different
functional votes as there are different questions calling for
associative action in which they are interested."^[_Guild
Socialism,_ p. 24. ] I am considerably in doubt whether Mr. Cole
thinks that Brown, Jones and Robinson should qualify in any election
where they assert that they are interested, or that somebody else, not
named, picks the functions in which they are entitled to be
interested. If I were asked to say what I believe Mr. Cole thinks, it
would be that he has smoothed over the difficulty by the enormously
strange assumption that it is the uninstructed voter who waives his
right to vote; and has concluded that whether functional voting is
arranged by a higher power, or "from below" on the principle that a
man may vote when it interests him to vote, only the instructed will
be voting anyway, and therefore the institution will work.

But there are two kinds of uninstructed voter. There is the man who
does not know and knows that he does not know. He is generally an
enlightened person. He is the man who waives his right to vote. But
there is also the man who is uninstructed and does not know that he
is, or care. He can always be gotten to the polls, if the party
machinery is working. His vote is the basis of the machine. And since
the communes of the guild society have large powers over taxation,
wages, prices, credit, and natural resources, it would be preposterous
to assume that elections will not be fought at least as passionately
as our own.

The way people exhibit their interest will not then delimit the
functions of a functional society. There are two other ways that
function might be defined. One would be by the trade unions which
fought the battle that brought guild socialism into being. Such a
struggle would harden groups of men together in some sort of
functional relation, and these groups would then become the vested
interests of the guild socialist society. Some of them, like the
miners and railroad men, would be very strong, and probably deeply
attached to the view of their function which they learned from the
battle with capitalism. It is not at all unlikely that certain
favorably placed trade unions would under a socialist state become the
center of coherence and government. But a guild society would
inevitably find them a tough problem to deal with, for direct action
would have revealed their strategic power, and some of their leaders
at least would not offer up this power readily on the altar of
freedom. In order to "coordinate" them, guild society would have to
gather together its strength, and fairly soon one would find, I think,
that the radicals under guild socialism would be asking for communes
strong enough to define the functions of the guilds.

But if you are going to have the government (commune) define
functions, the premise of the theory disappears. It had to suppose
that a scheme of functions was obvious in order that the concave shops
would voluntarily relate themselves to society. If there is no settled
scheme of functions in every voter's head, he has no better way under
guild socialism than under orthodox democracy of turning a
self-centered opinion into a social judgment. And, of course, there
can be no such settled scheme, because, even if Mr. Cole and his
friends devised a good one, the shop democracies from which all power
derives, would judge the scheme in operation by what they learn of it
and by what they can imagine. The guilds would see the same scheme
differently. And so instead of the scheme being the skeleton that
keeps guild society together, the attempt to define what the scheme
ought to be, would be under guild socialism as elsewhere, the main
business of politics. If we could allow Mr. Cole his scheme of
functions we could allow him almost everything. Unfortunately he has
inserted in his premise what he wishes a guild society to
deduce.[^long]

[^long]: I have dealt with Mr. Cole's theory rather than with
the experience of Soviet Russia because, while the testimony is
fragmentary, all competent observers seem to agree that Russia in 1921
does not illustrate a communist state in working order. Russia is in
revolution, and what you can learn from Russia is what a revolution is
like. You can learn very little about what a communist society would
be like. It is, however, immensely significant that, first as
practical revolutionists and then as public officials, the Russian
communists have relied not upon the spontaneous democracy of the
Russian people, but on the discipline, special interest and the
noblesse oblige of a specialized class-the loyal and indoctrinated
members of the Communist party. In the "transition," on which no time
limit has been set, I believe, the cure for class government and the
coercive state is strictly homeopathic.

    There is also the question of why I selected Mr. Cole's books rather
    than the much more closely reasoned "Constitution for the Socialist
    Commonwealth of Great Britain" by Sidney and Beatrice Webb. I admire
    that book very much; but I have not been able to convince myself that
    it is not an intellectual tour de force. Mr. Cole seems to me far more
    authentically in the spirit of the socialist movement, and therefore,
    a better witness.
